What makes an application design useful? 

The answer is that it is solving an actual important need of the user.
The first step to success is understanding the user and their needs.

### Example: Ugly but Useful - Craigslist

Craigslist used to be, and still is, quite ugly and quite primitive, but because all the announcements in New York were there, one had to learn to jump through its hoops in order to sell, buy, and rent. Somebody created a very short video of [how to improve the UX of Craigslist](https://youtube.com/shorts/smicZwXD5GI?feature=share) 
> Do you know of other situations where usefulness is so important, that we put up with horrible user experience? 


## How do designers understand user needs?

The "empathise" step in Design Thinking.

- You talk to the potential users. 
- You observe them.
- You try to imagine how is it to be them.
- You analyze alternative solutions. 

- Some of the techniques in the "Design. Think. Make. Break. Repeat"
	- 5 Whys
	- Empathetic Modeling
	- ...

## How do designers capture user needs?
- Functional Requirements, user stories, the MoSCoW method, etc. 
- Personas - more user characteristics than needs ([read at id.org](https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/article/personas-why-and-how-you-should-use-them))
	- Goal directed
	- Role-based
	- Engaging Personas 


## Project Work👬
- Do the empathy work required to understand the needs of your target user group
- Based on your understanding prioritize a set of requirements for your app using 
	- the MoSCoW template (Focus on the Must and Won't),
	- user stories,
	- any other method you prefer to capture prioritized user need
- Create a very brief persona 


