
# Usability

Usability is a quality attribute that assesses how easy user interfaces are to use. It is usually thought as decomposable further in more precise qualities: 

1. **Learnability** - How easy is it for users to accomplish basic tasks the first time they encounter the design?

3.  **Efficiency** - Once users have learned the design, how quickly can they perform tasks?

4. **Memorability** - When users return to the design after a period of not using it, how easily can they reestablish proficiency?

5. **Absence of Errors** - How many errors do users make, how severe are these errors, and how easily can they recover from the errors?

6.  **Satisfaction** - How pleasant is the use of the design?


## Heuristics

For some things there are rules. E.g. multiplication.
For some other things, usually the more complex things, there are no simple rules. 
But there are heuristics -- loosely defined rules that are likely to help, but are not as strict as rules. 


One of the most popular set of heuristics is the one of Jakob Nielsen. Published in 1994 in the book “Usability Inspection Methods” by Jakob Nielsen and Robert L. Mack. They were a refinemend of an earlier set of heuristics by Nielsen and Molich --  a dane. 
1. [Visibility of system status](./usability_examples/1_status.md)
2. [Match between system and the real world](./usability_examples/2_match.md)
3. [User control and freedom](./usability_examples/3_control.md)
4. [Consistency and standards](./usability_examples/4_consistency.md)
5. [Error prevention](./usability_examples/5_error.md)
6. [Recognition rather than recall](./usability_examples/6_recognition.md)
7. [Flexibility and efficiency of use](./usability_examples/7_flexibility.md)
8. [Aesthetic and minimalist design](./usability_examples/8_aesthetics.md)
9. [Help users recognize, diagnose, and recover from errors](./usability_examples/9_help.md)
10. [Help and documentation](./usability_examples/10_documentation.md)




## Bibliography

Molich maintains his own version of the Nielsen heuristics with examples that are very clear and easy to read [https://www.dialogdesign.dk/nielsens-heuristics-1994/](https://www.dialogdesign.dk/nielsens-heuristics-1994/)

